Impaired growth hormone (GH) response to pyridostigmine in type 1 diabetic patients with exaggerated GH-releasing hormone-stimulated GH secretion.
 In the present study we investigated the effects of the acetylcholinesterase inhibitor pyridostigmine (PD), which is hypothesized to decrease hypothalamic somatostatin tone, alone and in association with GH-releasing hormone (GHRH) on GH secretion in 18 type 1 diabetic patients and 12 normal subjects using a randomized double blind placebo-controlled protocol.
 All subjects received either 120 mg oral PD or placebo 60 min before iv injection of either human GHRH-(1-29) NH2 (100 micrograms) or sterile water (2 mL).
 In normal subjects both PD alone and GHRH alone caused a significant increase in GH.
 PD and GHRH acted in a synergistic fashion when combined.
 In diabetic patients the GH response to GHRH was variable.
 To segregate the responses, the ratio between the GH increase after GHRH plus PD and after GHRH alone was calculated for each subject.
 In 10 diabetic patients (group A) the ratio was lower than 2 SD (P less than 0.05) from the mean response of normal subjects.
 These patients showed an exaggerated GH increase after GHRH and a lower GH increase after PD with respect to normal subjects.
 Eight diabetic patients (group B) showed a ratio similar to that in normal subjects and similar GH responses to the stimuli.
 No significant differences were found between groups A and B with respect to age, body mass index, and blood glucose levels.
 Duration of diabetes was longer and basal GH levels were higher in group A.
 Hemoglobin-A1c was higher in group A, but of only borderline statistical significance (P = 0.052).
 Our data demonstrate that in diabetic patients with exaggerated GH responses to GHRH an increase in cholinergic tone does not affect GH secretion.
 These data suggest that in some type 1 diabetic patients an altered somatostatinergic control of GH secretion may contribute to their abnormal GH response to GHRH.
