The Patterns of Care Outcome Study for cancer of the uterine cervix. Results of the Second National Practice Survey.
 This report summarizes the outcome results of the Patterns of Care Study (PCS) of cancer of the uterine cervix from 565 patients treated in 1978.
 The 5-year survival with no evidence of disease was: Stage I, 74%; Stage II, 56%; and Stage III, 33%.
 The 5-year local in-field failure rate was: Stage I, 12%, Stage II, 27%; and Stage III, 51%.
 Extent of parametrial involvement, unilateral versus bilateral, may be important in determining survival and local failure.
 The four-year actuarial survival was 58% for unilateral involvement versus 47% for bilateral (P = 0.06), and the local failure rate was 32% for unilateral versus 45% for bilateral (P less than 0.05).
 When analyzed by stage, patients with Stage IIb disease with unilateral parametrial involvement showed a trend toward improved survival and decreased local failure compared with those with bilateral Stage IIb cancers (P = 0.1).
 The use of intracavitary irradiation significantly improved survival and reduced local failures.
 Furthermore, the number of intracavitary applications was important.
 When two or more intracavitary applications were used compared with one application, local in-field failure was significantly reduced, 29% versus 17% at 4 years (P less than 0.001), and four-year survival was improved, 60% versus 73% (P = 0.01).
 The four-year actuarial rate of major complications depended on the stage: Stage I, 8%; Stage II, 15%; and Stage III, 13%.
 There was a statistically significant increase in major complications in patients undergoing laparotomy for staging versus no laparotomy 23% versus 11% at 4 years (P less than or equal to 0.01) and a trend toward increased major complications in patients who were thin or had prior abdominal surgery.
 This study confirmed the stage-dependent outcome of treatment of cancer of the uterine cervix with radiation and indicated that further division of Stage IIb to indicate prognostic significance of unilateral or bilateral parametrial involvement may be warranted.
 This study also confirmed the importance of intracavitary radiation in optimizing control established by the 1973 PCS.
 It further suggests that where possible, two intracavitary insertions may yield better results than one insertion.
