Zidovudine (Retrovir) update.
 Zidovudine (AZT) is the first antiretroviral agent to be licensed for the treatment of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection.
 Since the initial placebo-controlled trial showing improved survival among patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) or symptomatic HIV infection (AIDS-related complex [ARC]) zidovudine has been evaluated in other stages of HIV infection.
 This review offers physicians who treat patients with HIV infection a comprehensive analysis of the current data on the clinical efficacy of zidovudine in various stages of HIV infection and on zidovudine's adverse effects.
 After a search of MEDLINE for pertinent articles published since 1985, controlled studies and studies of long-term zidovudine therapy, of zidovudine therapy for HIV-related conditions and of the incidence and management of adverse reactions were evaluated.
 In addition, abstracts from international meetings were reviewed.
 No significant difference in clinical outcome was found between high-dose and low-dose zidovudine therapy, but there were significantly fewer toxic effects in the low-dose group.
 In two other studies zidovudine was found to delay disease progression in patients with asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic HIV infection who had an absolute CD4 count of less than 0.5 x 10(9)/L; the low incidence of adverse reactions may have been due to either the early stage of the infection or the low dose used.
 The demonstration of zidovudine-resistant isolates after at least 6 months of therapy has yet to be correlated with clinical deterioration.
 When to begin zidovudine therapy among asymptomatic patients with a CD4 count of less than 0.5 x 10(9)/L remains unclear.
 Zidovudine can be used safely to delay progression to AIDS or ARC in certain patients with asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic HIV infection and can prolong survival in those with more severe infection.
 Further studies are necessary to identify indicators that could better define when to start treatment and how to alleviate toxic effects.
 Combination therapy with such agents as interferon alpha may become the preferred choice of therapy to prevent toxic effects and zidovudine resistance.
 Zidovudine prophylaxis has been used after HIV exposure.
 Although studies with animal models have had encouraging results infection has occurred despite immediate prophylaxis and thus further investigation is required.
