Response patterns of hairy cell leukemia to B-cell mitogens and growth factors.
 The effect of mitogens and/or recombinant B-cell growth factors (M/GFs) on the in vitro growth of hairy cells was examined.
 Tumor cells were isolated from the spleens of four patients with hairy cell leukemia (HCL) by Ficoll-Hypaque sedimentation and E-rosetting.
 Enrichment for tumor cells was confirmed with intracytoplasmic immunoglobulin (Ig) staining, tartrate resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) staining, and staining using monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) directed at B, T, myeloid, and monocytoid antigens (Ags) in indirect immunofluorescence assays.
 Tumor cells were B1(CD20)+ B2(CD21)- B4(CD19)+ IL-2R(CD25)+ PCA-1 +/- TRAP+.
 HCLs neither synthesized DNA nor secreted Ig in response to culture with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), interleukin-1 alpha (IL-1 alpha), IL-1 beta, IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, or IL-6.
 However, a proliferative response (stimulation index greater than or equal to 3.0) without Ig secretion was triggered in HCLs by mitogens or combinations of GFs.
 Specifically, DNA synthesis was induced at 3 days in three of four HCL samples cultured with Staphylococcus aureus Cowan A (SAC) or the combination of phorbol ester (TPA) and the calcium ionophore A 23187 (Ca2+); DNA synthesis was triggered later (day 7) by tumor necrosis factor (TNF) or by IL-4 and IL-5.
 In contrast, the fourth patient, a nonresponder to SAC or TPA/Ca2+, demonstrated increased DNA synthesis at day 3 when cocultured with IL-4 and IL-5.
 Both autoradiography and staining with antibromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) MoAb conjugated to fluorescein confirmed DNA synthesis by only a minority (5% to 23%) of tumor cells within each patient.
 Dual staining confirmed that responsive cells were both BrdU+ and TRAP+.
 DNA synthesis induced by TPA/Ca2+ was blocked specifically by anti-IL-6 Ab; in contrast, the HCL proliferative response to SAC, TNF, or IL-4 and IL-5 was not inhibited by anti-IL-6 Ab.
 alpha-Interferon inhibited the response to TPA/Ca2+, TNF, or IL-4 and IL-5 without any effect on response to SAC.
 Finally, peroxidase-antiperoxidase staining demonstrated that HCLs are induced by TPA/Ca2+, but not by SAC, to produce intracytoplasmic IL-6.
 These data demonstrate IL-4, IL-5, and IL-6 mediated DNA synthesis by HCLs in vitro and suggest a possible in vivo role for these growth factors in the pathophysiology of HCL.
