Progressive functional deterioration of bioprostheses assessed by Doppler ultrasonography.
 Doppler echocardiography was used to study the function of bioprosthetic heart valves by noninvasive means in 32 patients aged 29 to 72 years at various postoperative intervals.
 There were 24 Ionescu-Shiley, four Hancock, and four Carpentier-Edwards prostheses, 19 in the aortic and 13 in the mitral position.
 Initial studies were performed at a mean of 2.3 years after implantation and were repeated one, two, and three years thereafter.
 Flow velocities in the mitral orifice, left ventricular outflow tract, and ascending aorta, as well as mitral pressure half-time, were measured from pulsed-wave or continuous-wave Doppler recordings.
 Mitral and aortic valve areas and aortic pressure gradients were calculated.
 In aortic prostheses the valve area decreased and pressure gradient increased progressively in relation to the time from implantation.
 The mean value (+/- SD) of the aortic valve area was 67 +/- 17 percent of the manufacturer's nominal value at the first examination and 57 +/- 20 percent one year later, 51 +/- 14 percent two years later, and 46 +/- 11 percent three years later (overall differences, p less than 0.01).
 In mitral prostheses, reduction of the valve area was not related to the time from implantation.
 The mean mitral valve area was 45 +/- 12 percent of the nominal value at rest and increased to 68 +/- 18 percent during exercise at a mean of 45 months after implantation.
 There was no change in these values at the one-year repeat study.
 It is concluded that in a population with predominantly pericardial bioprostheses, (1) aortic tissue prostheses showed a progressive functional deterioration demonstrable by Doppler echocardiography, most probably due to degenerative changes; and (2) in mitral tissue prostheses, there was no significant reduction of orifice area in relation to time from implantation.
 Reduction of mitral valve areas may, to some extent, reflect a less than full opening at rest.
