Effects of diltiazem on the functional recovery of the myocardium at organ and cellular level during prolonged hypothermic ischemic cardiac arrest.
 The effectiveness of diltiazem on the functional recovery of the heart, calcium (Ca++) uptake and binding, Ca++ ATPase of cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), and MB fraction of creatine kinase (MBCK) of coronary sinus blood was investigated after one and a half hours of reperfusion following three hours of ischemic cardiac arrest.
 The dogs were divided into three groups: group I, sham bypass; group II, cold crystalloid cardioplegia; and group III, cold crystalloid cardioplegia with diltiazem.
 There was a decrease in aortic pressures left ventricular pressure development (dp/dt), left ventricular work index (LVWI), total systemic vascular resistance (TSVR), and left ventricular systolic pressure (LVSP) in the sham bypass group.
 There was a decrease in cardiac index (CI), LVWI, and mean right atrial pressure (mRAP) and an increase in TSVR and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) in group II as compared with group I.
 Although there was a tendency for a decrease in the indices of myocardial contractility in group II, they were not significantly different from those in group I.
 The indices of myocardial contractility, CI, and LVWI in group III were slightly higher than in group II, but they were not significantly different from each other.
 The values for calcium uptake by SR in groups II and III were similar but significantly lower than those in group I.
 Calcium binding in group III was significantly lower than that in group I.
 Calcium ATPase of SR in the three groups were similar.
 Although MBCK increased in all the groups, the increases were not significantly different among the three groups.
 The results of this study indicate that cold crystalloid cardioplegia with diltiazem was not better than cold crystalloid alone in preserving the cardiac contractility and cellular function during prolonged ischemic cardiac arrest.
 However, the cardiac function in terms of cardiac index was better preserved with diltiazem.
