Changes in plasma free fatty acids and glycerols during prolonged exercise in trained and hypertensive persons taking propranolol and pindolol.
 The extent to which lipolysis is attenuated during prolonged submaximal exercise during beta blockade was determined in 12 normotensive endurance-trained and 12 hypertensive sedentary men using nonselective drugs with and without intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (ISA).
 Initially, subjects performed a graded treadmill test to determine maximal oxygen uptake (VO2max).
 This was followed by 2-hour walks at 25 and 45% of the subject's VO2max under each of 3 treatments: pindolol (ISA), propranolol (non-ISA) and placebo.
 The distribution of medication was randomized and double blinded.
 Blood samples taken at rest and every 30 minutes during the 2-hour walks were analyzed to determine the concentrations of free fatty acids (FFA) and glycerol.
 On the basis of the respective changes in FFA, glycerols and the respiratory exchange ratio, beta-adrenergic blockade did not attenuate lipolysis in the untrained hypertensive subjects when compared with the placebo administration.
 However, beta blockade did demonstrate a tendency to attenuate lipolysis in the trained, normotensive subjects when compared with results after placebo administration.
 This was particularly evident at 30 minutes of exercise, when both glycerol and FFA concentrations were not increased above resting values under both conditions of beta blockade.
 No differences between pindolol and propranolol were observed.
 Therefore, a beta-blocking agent with ISA properties appears to have no clear benefit with respect to lipid metabolism during low and moderate intensity exercise.
 Furthermore, these data demonstrate that beta blockade does not inhibit exercise-induced lipolysis at low and moderate intensities of exercise as formerly believed, and is unlikely to be the cause of fatigue normally observed during work in patient populations taking beta-blocking medication.
