Interleukin-2-induced lung permeability is mediated by leukotriene B4.
 Interleukin (IL)-2 therapy leads to respiratory dysfunction due to increased vascular permeability.
 This study examines the role of the chemoattractant, immunomodulator, and permeability-promoting agent leukotriene (LT) B4 in this setting.
 Sheep with chronic lung lymph fistulae were given IL-2, 10(5) U/kg as an IV bolus (n = 6).
 Within 2 hours this led to a significant increase in LTB4 levels in both plasma and lung lymph.
 The mean pulmonary artery pressure (MPAP) rose while the pulmonary artery wedge pressure was unchanged.
 Arterial oxygen tension (PaO2) fell.
 Lung lymph flow (QL) was tripled (P less than 0.05) at 3 hours, coinciding with an increase in the lymph/plasma (L/P) protein ratio (P less than 0.05) resulting in an increase in the lymph protein clearance (P less than 0.05), data documenting increased microvascular permeability to protein.
 Mild leukopenia and thrombocytopenia (P less than 0.05) occurred.
 Body temperature rose and shaking chills were common.
 Pretreatment with the lipoxygenase inhibitor diethylcarbamazine (DEC; n = 6) reduced baseline plasma LTB4 levels and prevented the IL-2-induced increases in LTB4 in plasma and lung lymph (P less than 0.05).
 In contrast to IL-2 treatment alone, DEC blunted the increase in MPAP and prevented the rises in QL (P less than 0.05), L/P protein ratio (P less than 0.05), and lymph protein clearance (P less than 0.05).
 DEC also prevented the IL-2-induced leukopenia, the fall in platelet count, and the rise in body temperature (P less than 0.05, respectively).
 Infusion of IL-2 excipient control (n = 5) did not affect plasma or lymph LTB4 levels but there were mild increases in MPAP (P less than 0.05).
 The QL also rose but this occurred while the L/P protein ratio fell (P less than 0.05).
 Body temperature rose moderately.
 The PaO2, leukocyte, and platelet counts were unaffected.
 These data indicate that IL-2 administration leads to pulmonary dysfunction manifest by pulmonary hypertension and increased vascular permeability, events associated with LTB4 synthesis and prevented by DEC.
 Leukotriene B4 appears therefore to mediate the IL-2-induced lung injury.
