Needle aspiration biopsy in salivary gland lesions.
 The value of needle aspiration biopsy in the evaluation and management of salivary gland pathology is controversial.
 The major reasons for this controversy are the difficulty in cytologic evaluation and the fact that the extent of surgery can be easily defined based on clinical judgement.
 However, a preoperative diagnosis is helpful in discussions with patients regarding the extent and type of surgery.
 Apart from the fact that needle biopsy can distinguish benign from malignant conditions, it is also very useful in distinguishing between salivary and other nonsalivary pathology.
 Over the past 7 1/2 years, we have performed 160 needle aspirations of parotid, submandibular, and submucosal lesions.
 Adequate specimens for cytologic evaluation were obtained in 155 patients (97%).
 A total of 84 parotid lesions, 70 submandibular lumps, and 6 submucosal abnormalities were detected.
 A cytologic diagnosis of benign pathology was made in 120 patients.
 Twelve patients had lymphoma and the diagnosis was suspected based on needle aspiration.
 There were 10 patients with tuberculosis and 30 patients with hyperplastic lymph nodes or benign lymphoepithelial disease of the parotid.
 There were three false-positive and two false-negative reports.
 No complications such as hematoma, nerve injury, or infection developed.
 The major difficulty was in distinguishing between malignancy and obstructive sialadenitis in the submandibular region.
 Needle aspiration was helpful in evaluating lesions in the tail of the parotid and submandibular area.
 The cytologic distinction between salivary and nonsalivary pathology was useful in planning the appropriate surgery and the extent of surgical resection.
 From a clinical standpoint, the distinction between benign and malignant salivary and nonsalivary pathology was very helpful.
 Preoperative diagnosis of Warthin's tumor, lymphoma, or benign lymphoepithelial disease was essential to the correct management of these patients.
